---
layout: post
tagline: "List with transparent Undo & Redo functionality"
category: coding
tags : [c#, list, undo, redo, transparent]
---
{% include JB/setup %}

It's been two months, but I finally found some time to post something in this blog :)

##Background
As a programming exercise for the University we have to create a simple Paint-like program in C#. It has some tools (lines, rectangles, ellipses, text), it must be able to save/load to a custom format that represents the current drawing and it must be able to export to common image formats. 

As representation of the current sketch I use a `List<T>` structure. The objects that were last added to the list are draw 'above' objects added previously. A bonus task was to add an Undo/Redo functionality, which I will explain in this post.

##Objectives

What I wanted to create was a transparent data structure that could just replace the existing `List<T>` structure, without having to add additional statements to keep the Undo/Redo state. Furthermore the structure should be usable in a wide variety of cases.

##What I did (summary)

First I created a class that represents the `List<T>` functionality called `UndoList<T>`. This class has a private class called `UndoAction<U>`, which represents something that happened to the original list. The `UndoList<T>` class has a `List<UndoAction<T>>` member that represents the stack of changes. To be able to provide a Redo functionality, there is a `pointer` member that points to the last change (I will come to this later).

##UndoAction

This class is very simple, it contains the action performed (`ActionType`) and the actual object that was Added/Removed:

```
private class UndoAction<U>
{
    public ActionType Type { get; private set; }
    public U Value { get; private set; }

    public UndoAction(ActionType type, U value)
    {
        this.Type = type;
        this.Value = value;
    }
}
```

##UndoList

This class has to be able to do the simple list operations: `list[i]`, `list.Add()`, `list.RemoveAt()` and `List.Clear()`. These functionalities are very easy to implement:

```
public void Add(T value)
{
    list.Add(value); //add the value to the actual list
    addUndoAction(new UndoAction<T>(ActionType.Add, value)); //add an entry to the Undo list
}
```

To provide the functionality of the `foreach` loop, `UndoList<T>` needs to be a subclass of `System.Collections.IEnumerable`. Implementing this interface is really easy for us: we simply return the `Enumerator` of the actual `List<T>` member which contains the representation of the sketch.

Implementing the `IEnumerable` interface goes like this:
```
public class UndoList<T> : IEnumerable
{
    private List<T> list; //the actual list with data

    public IEnumerator GetEnumerator()
    {
        return list.GetEnumerator();
    }

    //other members
}
```

##The `pointer` member

If we were only required to provide an Undo functionality, we could just use a list with `UndoAction<U>` entries. When the `Undo()` function is called, undo the action and remove the last entry of the list. For `Redo()` to work, we either need to keep track of the Undo's we did (which comes down to keeping track of a list that is used to keep track of another list) or we need to use a pointer. The `pointer` member of the `UndoList<T>` class points to the last action that was added to the `List<UndoAction<T>>` list. When `Undo()` is called, the action will be undone and after that the pointer is decreased. We can do this until the pointer equals `-1`, which means there is no action left to undo. After you called `Undo()` a few times and you then call `Redo()`, the pointer will be increased and after that, the action will be applied to the list with data.

##Final words

This class is a good example of how templates can be used in a meaningful way and I learned quite some things from it. I made the source available under the MIT License, you can get it [here](https://gist.github.com/mrexodia/0a12d91b4d4b9b94faa3).

This class has very minimal functionality of the `List<T>` class. Sorting has no Undo/Redo and `Clear()` makes it look like every element was removed one-by-one. Feel free to improve on this :)

Mr. eXoDia